--- Page 72 ---
Learning Module 2 T ypes of Financial Returns62
shares available in the market, which can potentially increase the value of the remaining 
shares, benefiting both investors and corporations. For US shareholders, buybacks also 
offer tax advantages: They avoid higher tax rates on dividends, and when appreciated 
shares are sold, any gains are typically taxed at the lower capital gains rate.
For long-term US government bonds, income return has historically been the 
dominant contributor to total returns, with capital appreciation playing a lesser role. 
There have been periods, however, such as in the early 2020s, when bond prices fell 
due to rising market interest rates, resulting in capital losses. Such losses are to be 
expected anytime there is a shift to a higher rate environment; in the 2020s case, we 
moved from a period of very low interest rates to a higher interest rate environment. 
Historically, an average of 85% of total returns for US long-term government bonds 
has come from income returns, with the remainder from price appreciation. Capital 
distribution returns, which benefit from periods of higher interest rates, such as during 
the 1980s, have declined over time.
Risks and Returns
Risk stems from the uncertainty between the expected returns on an investment and 
the actual, realized returns. This risk can reflect either pervasive macro factors or 
issuer-specific micro factors.
 ■ Macro risks or systematic risks  are broad economy-wide risks that influ -
ence the performance of investments. The returns are systematically depen -
dent on these factors. If the economy or the financial markets perform 
well, asset returns are likely to follow suit. Systematic risk largely cannot be 
mitigated and thus is also called non-diversifiable risk.
 ■ Micro risks or unsystematic risks  are associated with factors specific to 
the issuer and determine investment returns based on the firm’s underlying 
economic characteristics, such as earning power, market posi

--- Page 73 ---
Types of Returns for Financial Assets, Instruments, and Indicators 63
 ■ Sector risks or industry risks  are similar to market risk in that they repre -
sent the possibility that forces particular to a sector will affect the returns 
of all assets within that grouping in an unexpected manner. The investment 
environment often necessitates a simplified sector classification for practical 
portfolio management, such as sector rotation strategies.
There are many risk measures to help us quantify total risk and its components, 
and these will be explored in later sections. One straightforward approach we address 
in this lesson is to calculate the range between the highest and lowest returns and 
relate this range to the average return, as shown in Exhibit 10.
The range of annual returns represents the variability of these returns, indicating 
the uncertainty of returns and the potential risk faced by investors. A narrower range 
suggests that returns are relatively consistent and predictable, indicating lower uncer-
tainty about their size and direction—in other words, lower risk. A relatively wide 
range signifies significant variability in annual returns across time, making returns 
less predictable. Such variability indicates unpredictability and implies higher risk, 
including greater potential losses as well as greater potential gains.
The higher risk premium of riskier investments compensates investors for taking 
on greater volatility and uncertainty, offering the potential for higher returns. This 
premium represents the additional expected return for taking on higher risk. It varies 
depending on the financial asset: bonds or equity, investment time horizon (short 
or long term), and other specific risk factors. Consequently, conservative investors 
prioritize stability and predictability, choosing investments with lower risk premiums 
and more modest potential returns.
Exhibit 10: Geometric Average Annual Total Returns and Range of Annual 
Total Returns, 1979

--- Page 74 ---
Learning Module 2 T ypes of Financial Returns64
Exhibit 11: Historical Geometric Average Return for Different Assets, 
1979–2023
0%
0% 20% 40%
Range of Annual Returns (%)
60% 80%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%Average Annual Return (%)
12%
14%
Large Capitalization
Return: 12.26%, Range: 75.37%
US Treasury Bonds
Return: 7.62%, Range: 70.01%
Small Capitalization
Return: 11.23%, Range: 81.04%
30-Day T-Bill
Return: 2.50%, Range: 6.21%
US Corporate Bonds
Return: 7.43%, Range: 54.97%Generally speaking, investors expect riskier investments to provide higher returns 
than less risky alternatives to compensate for the additional risks. The realized expe -
rience tends to match the expectation over time: Although variability in returns is not 
directly proportional to average returns, investment returns tend to increase with risk.
From the investor perspective, if an investment promises high returns without 
increased risk, there will be increased demand for it. This demand will drive up the 
price of the investment, which, in turn, reduces the potential rate of return for those 
seeking to invest. If the expectation of returns were relatively low in comparison 
to the level of perceived risk, however, investors would not invest in the particular 
assets. This reaction would cause the prices to fall and increase the rate of return to a 
level that would be more appealing to investors. These two examples underscore the 
fundamental risk–return trade-off in investing: Expected returns rise with risk, as 
higher-risk investments typically offer greater potential returns to reward investors 
for taking on additional risk.
CASE STUDY
Asset Allocation and Returns
In investment management, investors’ differing objectives inform asset alloca -
tion among various assets. Here, we present three hypothetical investors with 
differing objectives:
 ■ Investor A seeks aggressive capital growth, prioritizing long-term 
capital appreciation.
 ■ Investor B looks for a balanced approach, seeking returns from 

